---
title: "Interactive Distance Field Mapping and Planning to Enable Human-Robot Collaboration"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/IDMP
excerpt: 'This paper is about the open-source framework IDMP. It uses gaussian processes to create continuous and differentiable distance fields.'
date: 2024-12-01
venue: 'Robotics and Automation Letters, RA-L (Rebuttal under review)'
#slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides2.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.09988'
#citation: 'Your Name, You. (2010). &quot;Paper Title Number 2.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(2).'
---

Human-robot collaborative applications require scene representations that are kept up-to-date and facilitate safe motions in dynamic scenes. In this letter, we present an interactive distance field mapping and planning (IDMP) framework that handles dynamic objects and collision avoidance through an efficient representation. We define interactive mapping and planning as the process of creating and updating the representation of the scene online while simultaneously planning and adapting the robot's actions based on that representation. The key aspect of this work is an efficient Gaussian Process field that performs incremental updates and handles dynamic objects reliably by identifying moving points via a simple and elegant formulation based on queries from a temporary latent model. In terms of mapping, IDMP is able to fuse point cloud data from single and multiple sensors, query the free space at any spatial resolution, and deal with moving objects without semantics. In terms of planning, IDMP allows seamless integration with gradient-based reactive planners facilitating dynamic obstacle avoidance for safe human-robot interactions. Our mapping performance is evaluated on both real and synthetic datasets. A comparison with similar state-of-the-art frameworks shows superior performance when handling dynamic objects and comparable or better performance in the accuracy of the computed distance and gradient field. Finally, we show how the framework can be used for fast motion planning in the presence of moving objects both in simulated and real-world scenes. An accompanying video, code, and datasets are made publicly available [here](https://uts-ri.github.io/IDMP/).